introduc to the spec issu on evolv intellig in gam
thi issu includ three pap select from thos pres to the evogam track within the evost 2013 conf esparcia-alcázar2013
al auth with a pap acceiv in that conf wer invit and then an op cal was mad to anybody work in the top of evolv intellig in gam
aft the auth submit an extend vert a select was mad and thes three pap wer acceiv aft two round of revid . the three pap repres a wid rang of gam and puzzl a rel rec trading-card gam domin mahlman et al . 2012 which was cre by donald vacarino and publ by rio grand gam in 2008 a class platform gam sup mario togeli et al . 2009 and a board gam mastermind which is act a puzzl propos init in the 70s by a telecommun engin and whos first solv was propos by donald knu a few year lat knuth1976 77 . the first pap by ransom wind 2014 is the on that tri to find a win deck of ten card for the domin gam in fact the problem that is tackl is to try and predict the gam stat to mak decid about the next mov
neur network ar apply to the stat of the gam when the play has to mak any decid and thes neur network hav to be train so that the outcom of thes decid is as fav to the play as poss
sev method hav been tri and an evolutionary-algorithm bas gam bot is the on on that obtain an edg ov class strategies . the second pap also combin evolv algorithm with oth algorithm in thi cas finit stat automat to evolv in thi cas strategies for adv a sup mario avat in platform of increas difficul mor et al . 2014
thi gam has been tradit us for comput intellig competit fsm ar also tradit us to driv gam bot in strategy and first person shoot gam
but design them can be tricky and an evolv algorithm that design the transit between stat is success us in thi pap for a mario that is abl to obtain good result up to a high level besid a study is mad on the pop nee to obtain good result in each level . the fin pap is mor pur evolv maestro-montojo et al . 2014 in the sens that it doe not combin evolv techn with oth in ord to solv the mastermind gam a puzzl in which a secret combin must be found with the help of hit giv as respons to every mov mad by a play
the pap approach thi problem from two diff angl first evolv pop of combin scor accord to the hint mad and then us genet program to evolv good scor method for thes combin that hav tradit been chos heur . sum up thi spec issu includ a divers set of pap that us evolv algorithm to find solv to a wid rang of gam combin them with oth techn such as neur net or finit stat automat .