introduct to the special issu on evolutionari intellig in game
this issu includ three paper select from those present to the evogam track within the evostar 2013 confer esparcia-alcázar2013
all author with a paper accept in that confer were invit and then an open call was made to anybodi work in the topic of evolutionari intellig in game
after the author submit an extend version a select was made and these three paper were accept after two round of revis . the three paper repres a wide rang of game and puzzl a relat recent trading-card game dominion mahlmann et al . 2012 which was creat by donald vacarino and publish by rio grand game in 2008 a classic platform game super mario togelius et al . 2009 and a board game mastermind which is actual a puzzl propos initi in the 70s by a telecommun engin and whose first solut was propos by donald knuth a few year later knuth1976 77 . the first paper by ransom winder 2014 is the one that tri to find a win deck of ten card for the dominion game in fact the problem that is tackl is to tri and predict the game state to make decis about the next move
neural network are appli to the state of the game when the player has to make ani decis and these neural network have to be train so that the outcom of these decis is as favor to the player as possibl
sever method have been tri and an evolutionary-algorithm base game bot is the onli one that obtain an edg over classic strategi . the second paper also combin evolutionari algorithm with other algorithm in this case finit state automata to evolv in this case strategi for advanc a super mario avatar in platform of increas difficulti mora et al . 2014
this game has been tradit use for comput intellig competit fsm are also tradit use to drive game bot in strategi and first person shooter game
but design them can be tricki and an evolutionari algorithm that design the transit between state is success use in this paper for a mario that is abl to obtain good result up to a high level besid a studi is made on the popul need to obtain good result in each level . the final paper is more pure evolutionari maestro-montojo et al . 2014 in the sens that it doe not combin evolutionari techniqu with other in order to solver the mastermind game a puzzl in which a secret combin must be found with the help of hit given as respons to everi move made by a player
the paper approach this problem from two differ angl first evolv popul of combin score accord to the hint made and then use genet program to evolv good score method for these combin that have tradit been chosen heurist . sum up this special issu includ a divers set of paper that use evolutionari algorithm to find solut to a wide rang of game combin them with other techniqu such as neural net or finit state automata .