Comparative analysis of accuracy and computational complexity across 21 swarm intelligence algorithms

Nonlinear, complex optimization problems are prevalent in many scientific and engineering fields. Traditional algorithms often struggle with these problems due to their high dimensionality and intricate nature, making them time-consuming. Many researchers have proposed new metaheuristic algorithms inspired by biological behaviors in nature, which comparatively show higher performance and accuracy than traditional optimization algorithms. Nature-inspired algorithms, particularly those based on swarm intelligence, offer adaptable and efficient solutions to these challenges. In recent years, swarm intelligence algorithms have made significant advancements. Classical and CEC benchmark suits are immersively useful for studying the performance of optimization algorithms. According to our literature survey, we identified that many algorithms were evaluated based on accuracy. Currently, swarm intelligence algorithms are used in many applications, and efficiency and computational complexity need to be evaluated. A broad-level study of the computational complexity and accuracy of popular swarm intelligence algorithms has not been done recently. Therefore this study we comprehensively evaluate and compare 21 bio-inspired swarm intelligence algorithms on eight non-separable unimodal, eight separable unimodal, five non-separable multimodal, seven separable multimodal functions, and two CEC 2018 many objective functions. We study the structure and mathematical model of the selected algorithms. Then we categorized selected algorithms into six different behavioral groups. We calculated the root mean square error between expected and actual values. Then we performed an RMSE cross-validation statistical test to understand how accurately an algorithm resolves an average problem. We found that Artificial Lizard Search Optimization (ALSO) is the most prominent algorithm in accuracy and efficiency. Besides that, Cat Swarm Optimization (CSO), Squirrel Search Algorithm (SSA), and Chimp Optimization Algorithm (CHOA-B) are also considered more universal algorithms. The Squirrel Search Algorithm (SSA) is ALSO’s second-best algorithm in time complexity. Wasp Swarm Algorithm (WSO), and Bat-Inspired Algorithm (BA) presented the lowest time complexity. Finally, several important issues and research directions are discussed.
