XCS-SL: a rule-based genetic learning system for sequence labeling

Sequence labeling is an interesting classification domain where, like normal classification, every input has a class label, but unlike normal classification, prediction of an input’s label may depend on the values of other inputs or their classes, and so a learner may need to refer to inputs and classes at different time stamps to classify the current input. This is more difficult because a learner does not know where and how many inputs are needed to classify the current input. Our interest is in learning general rules for sequence labeling. The XCS algorithm is a rule-based knowledge discovery system powered by a genetic algorithm which has often been used for classification. Here we present XCS-SL, an extension of XCS classifier system which can be applicable to sequence labeling. Towards an application of Learning Classifier System (LCS) to sequence labeling, we propose a new classifier condition with memory (called a variable-length condition) and a rule-discovery system for the new classifier condition, which enables XCS to apply it to sequence labeling. In XCS-SL, classification rules (called “classifiers” here) can include extra conditions on previous inputs, which act as memories. In sequence labeling, the number of conditions/memories needed may be different for each input, hence, using a fixed number of conditions (i.e., fixed-length condition) for all classifiers is not a good solution. Instead, XCS-SL classifiers have a variable-length condition to provide more or less memory. The genetic algorithm can grow and shrink conditions to find a suitable memory size. On two synthetic benchmark problems XCS-SL learns optimal classifiers, and on a real-world sequence labeling task it derives high classification accuracy and discovers interesting knowledge that shows dependencies between inputs at different times. The comprehensively described system is the first application of a LCS to sequence labeling and we consider it a promising direction for future work.
