Multi-resolution analysis and deep neural network architecture based hybrid feature extraction technique for plant disease identification and severity estimation

The crop protection techniques using efficient plant disease identification are highly beneficial for Smart Agriculture Management which further decreases the gap between the demand/supply of consumers & farmers. However, an efficient feature extraction technique is desirable to achieve high accuracy, least graphical processing, and low processing time for coloured images. Therefore, this work proposes a hybrid novel feature extraction technique for coloured plant leaf images to overcome these challenges. This work is divided into two parts: 1). Plant disease identification and 2). Plant disease severity estimation. In this technique, multiresolution analysis using large-scale coefficients of Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) is performed using orthogonal wavelets. The orthogonal wavelets such as Daubechies, Biorthogonal, Symlets and Coiflets with appropriate vanishing moments are utilized to select significant features. Then, the Eigen decomposition of large-scale DWT-based coloured image features is utilized using Principal Component Analysis (PCA), where only the Eigenvalues with large variance are considered for further feature selection. Several experiments are carried out for the selection of felicitous sub-bands & decomposition levels. The Deep Neural network (DNNs) architectures such as AlexNet, ResNet 101 and Inception V3 are incorporated to classify the obtained features. The DNNs operate on Convolutional Neural Networks, which utilize the weights from pre-learned ImageNet Database classes to classify various classes. The combination of DNNs with Transfer Learning and Fine Tuning is made to tune the parameters for better efficacy. Experiments were performed on the PlantVillage Database, which contains healthy/diseased images of plants such as Apple, Corn, Grapes and tomato leaves. A new database is created by capturing the images of Rice Crop Leaves, including healthy and diseased leaves. A total of 8000 images are processed for disease identification. The proposed technique provided 99% accuracy for disease identification task and 90% for disease severity estimation in the real-life Rice Dataset and outperformed the existing techniques in this field of research.
